[Music] Good day everyone. I'm Norman Walberger,
and we're investigating a new approach to
arithmetic based on multi-sets—data structures
which are unordered and allow repetition. Today,
we're going to take the big step from poly numbers
to multi numbers. Let me quickly review what we
did in our previous video. We introduced zero as
the multi-set, or more shortly, mset, which is
empty and has nothing in it. We introduced the
type of natural number. The natural number is
an mset of zeros. So there's a natural number
that's actually probably the simplest natural
number which is not zero itself, and it's called
one. This natural number has two zeros in it.
It's got the usual name of two. This is
three, etc. So this is the usual natural
number story. A poly number is an mset of natural
numbers, and the simplest one is this one, alpha,
which is just the mset containing one. Here is a
more general poly number: 0, 0, 0, 1, 3, 4, 4. So
these are all natural numbers. This is an mset of
natural numbers, so therefore it's a poly number.
And then we also introduced multi numbers.
A multi number is an mset of poly numbers.
So the simplest one there would be the mset
consisting just of alpha, and we haven't yet
given it a name. That's going to be interesting
for us today—to investigate how we should
get some terminology going for these
multi numbers. Here's a more general
kind of multi-number. So it's an mset
consisting of—there's a poly number,
there's another poly number, there's another poly
number, and there's another poly number. So it's
an mset of poly numbers. Repetitions are allowed
and it's unordered. There's no commas, and so
this is a multi-number. Today, we want to really
talk about the big step going from here to here.
It might be useful to introduce this designation
of a pure mset to denote one of these structures
that is obtained by starting with empty
msets and just putting them in other msets,
so just nesting empty msets inside other msets,
etc. So this is contained in this sort of ongoing
sequence. Here we started with zero, which is a
type, and then we had Nat, which includes zero,
and then poly, and multi, and clearly we could
keep on going in a kind of a step-by-step fashion.
So I want to introduce this idea because it's
certainly possible that later on we might be
interested in msets of other things—other kinds
of objects, not just empty msets and things
formed from them. Alright, so the advantage
of making this specific is that this way,
the operations that we're going to talk about
later are all sort of consistently defined on
these things because an mset, in this context of
pure mset, is already an mset of msets, and it's
already an mset of msets of msets, etc. So I also
might want to point out that we should not think
about these things as objects. So it's not as
if we have an object of all multi-sets, okay?
We want to avoid that sort of modern set theory
approach where we think that we've got all the
multi-sets contained in here. No, no. What we're
doing is we're rather identifying a type, okay? So
you should think about it as being something like
instructions for a computer. So the computer gets
some input, and the computer is able to read
that input and then decide whether the object
is of this type or some other type, okay? That's
what we're talking about. These are not objects,
and I want to just emphasize that there's this
basic principle that runs through a lot of my
exposition, which is that we want write-downable
mathematics. We want to separate or distance
ourselves from the 20th-century abstractions
which have allowed people to think about things
which they are not actually able to write
down. So we don't want to be doing that,
okay? So we want to insist that all the pure
msets that we're talking about are completely
unambiguously write-downable. You could actually
exhibit them in their entirety, not with any
requirements of alternate universes or who knows
what, beyond our vision. So in particular, have a
look at these. These are examples of things which,
from our point of view at least at this stage,
are not allowable. We are not allowed to say, "Oh,
consider this pure mset. What is this? Oh, it's
what you get when you start with an empty mset
like a box, and then you put that inside a bigger
box, and you put that inside a bigger box, and you
put that inside a bigger box, and you keep going
without stopping. Keep going. Everything
is contained in a bigger box to infinity,
whatever that means." Okay, that's the kind of
thing that 20th-century mathematicians were not
reluctant to talk about. If you actually look
at the foundations of analysis or differential
geometry or algebraic geometry or topology,
it's essentially this kind of talking which
is at the core of much of these subjects. Okay,
we do not want to go there, okay? So for us,
this kind of object where you have to do an
infinite number of things is not going to be
allowed. Similarly, if going the other way, we can
start with a box, and inside it put another box,
and inside that you put another box, inside
that you put another box, and then you keep
going again to infinity. Okay, we're not allowed
to use that language, okay? Because we can't write
the thing down completely. This is obviously not
an adequate representation just like this isn't.
So these are not the kinds of things that we want
to do. But I want to keep open the possibility
that there's an idea contained here, right? There
is some kind of idea, and it's possible for us to
perhaps access that idea in a completely
write-downable, finite, concrete fashion.
But we would have to do that in a different way
from doing something like this with three dots,
okay? So I'm not saying that this object will
never or these objects will never be part of our
world. I'm just saying that when we do eventually
want to try to think about something like this,
we're going to have to think about them in
different ways that allow us still to write them
down completely finitely and write-downably, okay?
And it's also useful to point out that later on,
we may want to depart from our pure mset
point of view and consider other kinds of
data structures like in the LOM system: lists,
order sets, multi-sets, and sets. Right now,
we're just focusing on multi-sets, but it will
become useful potentially for us to consider other
such structures, okay? So in that case, we might
depart from this very pure mset point of view.
So our two basic operations are addition and
multiplication, and let's review them here.
I hope you've watched Math Foundations 227, the
previous video, where we introduced this approach
and it's fresh in your mind. So addition is the
simplest possible thing. We just take msets and
we dump the contents out into another box. That's
addition of msets. Very simple. So for example,
here's an mset, here's an mset, here's an mset.
This mset here has some poly numbers in them.
These are poly numbers, and this one here has some
poly numbers and also a number, but they're all
msets of poly numbers, so these are all multi
numbers. And we just get the sum by dumping them
out. So the 3, the 3, the 1, 2, the 0, the 0, the
1, the 3, the 4. Multiplication is one step up,
a little bit more sophisticated in that it
relies on the prior definition of addition.
But we're going to be adding elements of the
various things to be multiplied in all possible
ways. So to multiply these three msets, we
take one element from this one, one element
from this one, and one element from this one,
and we add them. And because addition doesn't
depend on the order in which we do things, so
also multiplication is not going to depend on the
order, so we don't need to worry about bracketing.
In other words, a big simplification. Okay,
so what do we actually get here? So we've got,
this mset has mset 2 and 3. It has mset 4, mset
4 in it. This one has mset 1, 6, and a 0. So we're
multiplying them. So we have to take elements from
each one. So let's take this mset 2, this mset
4, this mset 1, 6, and we're going to add them.
This one, mset 2, mset 4, and the 0, and we'll
add them. Then mset 2 and then this mset 4 and
this mset 1, 6, add them. This mset 2, this mset
4, and then 0 and add them. And then the same kind
of thing, but now we take this number 3, the
number 3 plus the mset 4 plus the mset 1, 6,
and add them. The mset 3, this mset 4, the 0, and
add them. This mset 3, this mset 4, this mset 1,
6, and add them. This mset 3, this mset 4, and
this 0, and we add them. Okay, when we actually
do that, okay, the sum of these things, just dump
them out, we get a 2, a 4, a 1, and a 6. Here we
get a 2, a 4. We add 0. Zero, remember, is the
empty mset. Adding that doesn't do anything,
so you just get 2, 4. This one here, you get
2, 4, 1, 6. The same thing as over here. Here,
the natural number 3 as an mset is 0, 0, 0. It
consists of three zeros. Okay, so when we look
at it that way, then adding them comes up with
0, 0, 0, 4, 1, 6. Here, the sum is 0, 0, 0, 4,
and this adding zero doesn't do anything,
and you're just adding an empty mset.
And here we get the same thing as here, and here
we get the same thing as here. So this is how we
calculate the product of msets. One of
the interesting aspects of this approach
to arithmetic is that it seems that no matter how
far you go, it's just part of some bigger picture.
Okay, so that means that we never have this
feeling of a complete understanding. We feel
that our understanding is always just temporary
and waiting for the next level, the next step,
the bigger picture of which this is just some
part. So we have to be a little bit modest,
but it also means that we need to be flexible
about the terminology and our notation and our
thinking because it might be possible that with
a few steps up, we start to see what we've just
previously been doing in a new light, and we have
to maybe improve our notation to make it fit with
this bigger picture. So that's going to happen
right here as we try to move from poly to multi.
So we've introduced this notation, alpha, which
corresponds with my usual terminology for poly
numbers. This alpha is sort of your basic
variable. So alpha was just a name for the
multi-set consisting of a single one. I want to
change the name of that now, okay? And this is,
you know, seemingly unmotivated until we go to
the multi point of view and then you see, ah,
there's actually a very good reason for doing
this. Okay, so we're going to change the name
from alpha to alpha 0 or alpha sub 0. Okay, so
we're going to make that change. So now the name
of this mset, the mset consisting just of one, is
now going to be alpha 0, alpha sub 0. Okay, so let
me remind you, there's some basic facts about this
thing. So if you take two alpha 0, in other words,
alpha 0 plus alpha 0, that's mset 1 plus mset 1.
Dump them together, you get mset 1, 1. Similarly,
three alpha 0 will be mset 1, 1, 1. If we
multiply this thing by itself, alpha 0 squared,
we have mset 1 times mset 1. We perform that by
adding the ingredients 1 plus 1 in there, so we
get mset 2. And similarly, alpha 0 cubed is mset
3 and so on. So now when we have a general poly
number like this thing here, mset 0, 0, 0, 1, 3,
4, 4, we can write that as a more usual polynomial
in alpha 0 here. Okay, by first of all sort of
decomposing this into its various types. So 0,
0, 0 is 1 mset, mset 1, mset 3, mset 4, 4, and
then we recognize this thing here is just the
number 3. This is what we're calling alpha 0. This
thing here, this single 3, that was alpha 0 cubed.
A single 4 would be alpha 0 to the fourth, and
there's two of them here. So in the same way here,
we get 2 alpha 0 to the fourth. Okay, so this
works better now because when we go to multi,
what we want to do is introduce a new object,
which is the previous object, namely alpha 0,
put into an mset. Okay, so we're going to take the
mset now consisting of alpha 0, and we're going to
give that a new name. That's going to be alpha sub
1. Okay, so alpha sub 1 is alpha sub 0 in an mset.
And I have to emphasize the important distinction
throughout this story of having an object and then
having that object in an mset. Okay, those are
two different things, and sometimes they're quite
different things. Okay, so you have to keep that
separation in mind. Alpha 0 is this thing. Alpha
1 is the alpha 0 in the mset. And actually,
you know, if we wrote it out just in terms of
brackets, it would look like this. So alpha 1 is
the mset consisting of alpha 0. There's alpha 0,
mset 1. And what is 1? Well, 1 is actually mset 0.
Okay, and what is 0 actually? Well, 0 is the empty
mset. So we could sort of parse this by seeing
that this alpha 1 is really, you know, a pair of
brackets containing a pair of brackets containing
a pair of brackets containing a pair of brackets.
Ultimately, it's just brackets. That's alpha sub
1. That's now our basic multi number which is
not itself a poly number. It's the starting point
from going from the poly world to the multi-world.
Okay, so let's do some basic arithmetic now
with multi numbers using this new notation
and we'll sort of see how it works. And it
also suggests that there's something else
that we need to introduce. Okay, so alpha sub 1,
that's mset alpha 0. Okay, so two alpha sub 1,
or I'll just say two alpha 1, is what you get
when you take two of these guys and dump them
together. So it's mset alpha 0, alpha 0, which
in terms of numbers is mset, mset 1, mset 1.
There's an alpha 0. There's another alpha 0.
Three alpha 1 will be mset consisting of mset 1,
mset 1, mset 1. That's an alpha 0,
that's an alpha 0, that's an alpha 0.
How about alpha 1 squared? Okay, so we're
squaring, multiplying this thing by itself.
Well, the way you multiply msets
is you form another mset whose
entries are the possible sums of entries here
and here. Well, there's only one entry here
and one entry here, one element here, one element
here, so there's only one possible sum that we're
going to form: alpha 0 plus alpha 0. Alpha
0 is mset 1, so we have mset 1 plus mset 1,
and that is mset 1, 1, right? We're just
dumping these two ones out into a separate box,
so we get another box with the two ones in
it. Okay, so that's what alpha sub 1 squared
looks like. Similarly, alpha 1 cubed looks like
this: it's an mset consisting of mset 1, 1, 1.
So here is a poly number in alpha 1, okay? Say 3
plus alpha 1 plus 4 alpha 1 squared plus alpha 1
to the fifth. We wanted to write that out. The
3 is mset 0, 0, 0. The alpha 1, well, that's
the same thing we've been talking about: mset,
mset 1. It's an mset containing just alpha 0,
and alpha 1 squared, that was this thing here,
and we have four of them, so we have four of them,
and alpha 1 to the fifth, parallel to this,
is going to be mset, mset 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1.
Okay, we could write this out more elementary by
making a big mset, okay, and then it's going to
have 0, 0, 0. It's going to have this mset 1, and
then it's going to have mset 1, 1, mset 1, 1, mset
1, 1, mset 1, 1, 1. Okay, and here we've written
it out then sort of in a pretty reduced form. We
could still make it more reduced by replacing the
ones with mset 0, and then we can make it even
more reduced by replacing the zeros with mset,
so then there would just be brackets and nothing
else. Okay, but this is a kind of a nice way of
reducing it to natural numbers. I think that works
well for us human beings. So I want to compare
this now with the corresponding poly story. We're
taking the same form but replacing alpha 1 with
alpha 0: 3 plus alpha 0 plus 4 alpha 0 squared
plus alpha 0 to the 5. So this is in the world
of poly, right? This is in the world of multi,
this is in the world of poly. So the 3 is still
0, 0, 0. The alpha 0 now is just mset 1. The
alpha 0 squared is mset 2. We have four of them.
And the alpha sub 0 to the 5 is mset 5. So if we
although I put a bracket over here,
there's no bracket. Sorry, nope, I could.
Okay, it's just this plus this plus
this plus this. Now if we want to
put all those together because it's a
sum of stuff, then there's a bracket,
and then we have three of these zeros. We
have a 1, we have a 2, 2, 2, 2, and a 5.
So you see it's in the world of polys the natural
numbers are occurring. So in the world of polys
the natural numbers are occurring. So I've been
in correspondence with powers of the alpha 0.
Over here in the multi-world when we're looking at
alpha 1 and polynomials in alpha 1, we're always
staying within a framework that just involves the
number 1, okay? We're not getting twos and threes
and so on. This is just in terms of number ones.
So that's telling us that there's some more here
that we need to actually include. We have not got
all of multi yet, okay? This is just sort of the
first step of multi. Okay, so let's get at these
further multi numbers. So we already have alpha 1,
okay? There's alpha 1, two alpha 1 we know, three
alpha 1. Now let's look at alpha 2. We're going to
introduce alpha sub 2 to be the mset consisting
of alpha 0 squared, okay? Alpha 1 was the mset
of alpha 0. Alpha 2 is alpha 0 squared, the mset
containing that. Alpha 3 will be corresponding to
the mset consisting of alpha 0 cubed. Now alpha
0 squared is mset 2, and alpha 0 cubed is mset 3,
so alpha 2 looks like this, and alpha 3 looks
like this. If we look at 2 alpha 2, well, we
have to add two of these things. We get mset with
two copies of mset 2, mset 2. Here's 3 alpha 2,
two copies of alpha 3 will be mset, mset 3, mset
3, and so on. Okay, so we're enlarging our world
here. So let's do some arithmetic with these
things just to get used to things. Alright,
so just some basic linear arithmetic. So say
alpha 1 plus 3 alpha 2 plus alpha 3. So that
mset plus three of those plus one of those, well,
we dump everything in boxes. We get an mset with
a single mset 1, an mset 2, mset 2, mset 2,
because we have three of them, and an mset 3.
How about alpha 1 squared? Well, we've already
done that. Okay, let me remind you that when we
multiply alpha 1 by alpha 1, we're getting mset,
mset 1, 1. Similarly, alpha 1 cubed was mset,
mset 1, 1, 1. What about alpha 2 squared?
So now we're going to take this mset
and multiply it by itself. How do we do that?
We have to take the mset consisting of the sum
of these two things. Okay, so mset 2, mset
2. Dump them together, we get mset 2, 2.
Similarly, alpha sub 2 cubed will be
the mset consisting of mset 2, 2, 2.
How about, say, alpha 1 times alpha
2? There's alpha 1, there's alpha 2.
To multiply them, they each have only
one element, so we just have to take
those single elements and add them. So we
add mset 1 and mset 2 to get mset 1, 2.
So there's the product of this sort of
like a variable alpha 1 with this sort
of a variable alpha 2, but they're not
really variables. They're just specific
multi numbers. Okay, so let's do a little bit
more arithmetic to try to get used to this
somewhat unfamiliar framework. Even though it's
corresponding to an algebra which is very familiar
to us, it's really just polynomial algebra,
but now in quite a lot of different variables.
So let's look at this expression here.
So we have alpha 0 times alpha 1 squared,
and I'm not going to write the times always, plus
alpha 2 cubed, alpha 4, plus 2 alpha 5 cubed.
Alright, so let's write this thing
out. So what is alpha 0? It is
the mset 1. What is alpha 1 squared? Well,
it is the mset consisting of mset 1, 1. Plus
alpha 2 cubed. What was alpha 2 cubed? It was mset
2, 2, 2. Alpha 4, that's going to be mset, mset 4.
Plus 2 alpha sub 5 cubed. Okay,
so there'll be two of them,
or maybe I'll just put 2, 2, alpha
sub 5. What's alpha sub 5? That is
this thing. And we're going to cube it,
so we need to put three of them together.
So we're going to get 5
like that.
Okay, so let's write this out in a kind of
an mset fashion. So if we multiply here,
these are multiplications. Okay,
multiplication, multiplication.
Okay, how do we multiply these two
things? We have to take an mset,
and we add the contents. So this is like,
1 is the mset consisting of 0. This is the
mset consisting of 1, 1. So when we
add them, we're going to get 0, 1, 1.
And what about this next one?
Here's this mset 2, 2, 2,
4. So when we multiply these two things,
we have to add the inner msets: 2, 2, 2, 4.
And this thing here,
2, 5, 5. Well, if we wanted to write that
out, we would write it out as 5, 5, 5, 5.
So if we wrote this as a big mset,
maybe I'll do it in a different color,
wrote it as a big mset, it would
be the mset consisting of 0, 1, 1,
and then 2, 2, 2, 4, and 5, 5, 5, and 5, 5.
And with some experience, we can just go
directly from this to this. So this monomial,
if you like, alpha 0 alpha
1 squared, corresponds to
this expression, a multi-set: 0, 1, 1, 0, 1,
1. This thing here, alpha 2 cubed, alpha 4,
is represented by this: 2, 2, 4. And this 2 alpha
sub 5 cubed is captured by those two things.
Okay, let's go the other way around.
Let's have a look at this thing here,
which is sort of written in more multi-set
notation. Let's see if we can sort of, you know,
write this out and see what we get. Okay, so let
me actually first of all maybe rewrite this in
sort of alpha form. Okay, so what is this thing
here? This thing here is a multi number. Okay,
because there's a poly number there and
there's a poly number there, so it's
what is this thing here? This is going to be alpha
1, alpha 5. And this thing here is going to be
alpha 0 alpha 3 squared. Okay, and we have
to multiply it by this thing here. This is
a multi number, and inside here we have
a 2 and a multi-set 1, 1, 1. So the 2 is
corresponding to alpha 0 squared
and the 1, 1, 1 that's corresponding
to, so plus alpha 1 cubed.
Okay, so now let's go back to black and
let's actually calculate this product using
mset multiplication. So this thing has
two elements, this thing has two elements,
so we have to form all possible sums of
these two things. So the first one is 1,
5, we add it to 2. 2 is the
mset 0, 0, so we get 1, 5, 0, 0.
When we add this thing and this thing, we're going
to get the mset 1, 5, 1, 1, 1. Adding these two,
we're going to get 0, 3, 3, 0, 0. And adding
these two, we're going to get 0, 3, 3, 1, 1, 1.
And now let's convert that into a sort
of a polynomial form, if you like,
in terms of alphas. Okay, so there's
a bunch of terms here. These are like
monomials. So this thing here would be
like alpha 0 squared, alpha 1, alpha 5,
plus here there'll be an alpha 1 to the
fourth, alpha 5 here, and alpha 0 cubed,
alpha 3 squared, I guess, and here alpha
0, alpha 1 cubed, and alpha 3 squared.
Okay, let's just check. Does that actually match
up with this thing here? So if we just multiply
this out using ordinary polynomial algebra, okay?
Alpha 0 squared times alpha 1, alpha 5. Yes,
that's that one there. And alpha 1 to the fourth,
alpha 5, that's that one times that one. Yes.
And this one times this one, alpha 0 cubed,
alpha 3 squared. Okay. And this one, alpha 0,
alpha 1 cubed, alpha 3 squared. Yeah, so where it
works out. So this is just reinforcing the idea
that what we really have here is just ordinary
algebra, but with lots of different variables,
with variables alpha 0, alpha 1, alpha 2, etc.
So it's actually already quite a rich framework.
So we're getting a very general algebra in an
unbounded number of variables, alpha 0, alpha 1,
alpha 2. And I want to emphasize that this extends
the former discussion that we've had in this
series and also in the algebraic calculus course:
the extension of arithmetic from poly to bipolys.
So what is a bipoly? Well, it's an extension of
our one-dimensional approach to polys. Remember,
a poly was a vertical list originally. So it's
like 2, 0, 1, 4 would be the poly: 2 plus 0 alpha
plus 1 alpha squared plus 4 alpha cubed. And
when we extend that one-dimensional array to
a two-dimensional array, then we can interpret
the result as a polynomial in alpha and beta,
where beta now corresponds to essentially that
entry there. So this bipoly here would be the
original one, plus also 3 beta, plus 5 alpha beta,
plus 1 alpha squared beta squared. Now in the new
notation that we're introducing, we're replacing
alpha with alpha 0, and so it makes sense to think
of beta as being replaced with alpha 1. Okay, so
we would maybe just rewrite this as 2 plus alpha
0 squared, plus 4 alpha 0 cubed, plus 3 alpha 1,
plus 5 alpha 0, alpha 1, plus alpha 0 squared,
alpha 1 squared. And then this thing here, as a
multi number, could—let's see if we believe this.
So here I'm writing it out sort of in terms of
msets with zeros and ones. So the 2 is just 0, 0.
And the alpha 0 cubed, well, there is an alpha
0 cubed. When we put it in an mset, okay,
this is like 3, but you put 3 in an mset, and
you get alpha 0 cubed. And here's another one,
here's another one, here's another one. So there's
four of them. The 3 alpha 1 is here, this 1 in
mset 1 is contained in a bigger mset 1, so that's
really an alpha 1, and there's three of them.
And then alpha 0, alpha 1, that product is
captured by this mset 0, 1 inside the big mset:
0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1. And there's five of them, okay?
And then alpha 0 squared, alpha 1 squared is
0, 0, 1, 1. So you see that the ordinary story
of poly numbers and bipoly numbers in this
mset approach, we write it all out invariably
just comes down to numbers: zeros and ones,
zeros and ones. And the more general
story, when we're allowing more variables,
is to of course allow for bigger numbers in here,
corresponding to variables with bigger indices.
So what we've done is we've created, I think, a
pretty logical and tight framework for algebra,
which is quite novel in some ways. But actually,
there's some surprises ahead of us. So up till
now, you could get used to this and say, "Okay,
this is just another way of thinking about the
arithmetic that I'm already familiar with." But
in my next video, I'm going to show you that this
actually takes us far beyond our usual experience.
Okay, that we're going to be able to look at
new aspects of arithmetic that
we had never considered before,
and that emerges actually also still staying
with this poly to multi-story when we think about
the third operation, right? So we've had
addition and multiplication. Well then
there's the next operation in the sequence which
you've probably already sort of thought about,
okay? And that, well, of course, we're
going to have to call that exponentiation,
but it's not an exponentiation that's totally
familiar to you, okay? There's going to be
some major surprises when we introduce
that into this story, and it'll be almost
like you'll be feeling like you're on
a strange vessel in uncharted waters.
I'm Norman Walberger. Thanks for listening.
[Music]